I'm awfully tired. Last week, I went to a meeting,
and we started at 9 in the morning, went right
through the noon hour until 11 o'clock at night,
five minutes. And I'm pretty pooped out, so if I'm
shaky, you'll know it's me. Oh, that's all right.
Maybe I'll catch you off guard or something. Yeah,
okay. Explain to me how your interest developed in
the oceans. During World War II, I was a
meteorologist in the Navy, and purely by chance, I
was sent to Scripps Institution of Oceanography
to learn how to forecast sea and swell for the then
coming Japanese invasion. and I was stationed in
New Caledonia. Two of us were to be sent to the
Philippines to set up a new weather center there,
and one was to come back to Scripps, and we drew
names out of a hat, and that's how I got into
oceanography. And came back to Scripps. Right.
Where's your hometown? Where were you from? My
hometown, actually, I was born in South Dakota. I
lived for short periods of time in Montana and
Astoria and Carleton, but I grew up in Newburgh,
Oregon, about 40 miles north of here. And what did
your parents do? My father was a printer and a
beekeeper. It was quite a combination. And so you
didn't go to school here at Oregon, did you? I went
to school at George Fox College, which was then
called Pacific College, and it happened to be in
the town that I grew up in. It was a Quaker college.
And was there even a major in meteorology per se?
No, I got the meteorology after the war started. I
joined the Navy and was sent to the postgraduate
school in Annapolis. That's where you became a
meteorologist. Right. There seems to be a goodly
number of meteorologists, if I may use this word,
who end up in oceanography about this time.
Spellhouse, for example, comes through the
School of the Air Force and ends up in directing
towards oceanography? Does there seem to be a
particular kinship towards meteorology and
oceanography? Well, I think the reason for this
was that there were a lot of meteorologists
trained, and when they got out after the war, there
was nothing for them to do. I know that I hadn't
planned on going to Scripps, and I wrote a letter to
Dr. Carl Rosby at Chicago and asked him what I could
do with my meteorology. He said, well, they're
starting a class at Scripps. Why don't I go down
there? And the class was in oceanography? It was
the first class that was set up in oceanography,
and almost everyone was a meteorologist that was
in the class. Who was in that class with you? Oh, I
never can remember them all. Bob Reed, John
Cochran from Texas A&M, Dale Leaper, William
Cameron, I'd have to look up the group. Sure, I
know. The only point of that question is that right
at Scripps, right at this time right after the war,
there seems to be a tremendous surge of
intellectual interest in oceanography, and a
goodly number of really first-rate
oceanographers appear. Do you have any
particular explanation for that? Well, I think
during World War II we found out that that we really
didn't know much about sound transmission in the
ocean or about sea and swell, any of these things
that the Navy needed to know. And Dr. Sferdip then,
right after the war, set up this class in which he
invited 15, selected 15 people to come into this
class. And it just was a step in function. OK. And
while you were there at Scripps, I think this is 46,
is it not? This was in September of 1946. Yeah, OK.
Now, while you were there in 46, I assume that at
least that you were following a graduate degree in
oceanography to lead towards a Ph.D. Is this
correct? This is right. We all enrolled for
master's degrees. We all had bachelor's degrees
plus some advanced training in meteorology. So we
minored in meteorology at UCLA and used our
credits that we'd gotten in the various service
schools and all of our group majored in physical
oceanography. So we were all somewhat
homogeneous in our training. And what did you work
on between, let's say, 46, 47, and 48? Were you
directed already towards a particular research
topic? We all had jobs at Scripps. We were all
graduate research assistants. And I was in charge
of the Navy processing section for
bathothermographs for the Pacific Ocean. And I
had about five or six people working for me. And I
worked at that until I left. Okay. You should have
known about the BT already pretty well. Didn't you
use it in meteorology? No. I'd never heard of it
until I got the experience. Never heard of it. It
was invented during the war. I'd never heard of
oceanography before I went down there. Okay. It's
something entirely new to me. So this was indeed a
deep ocean movie. Well, from a guy from the Dakotas
and then Oregon, I suspect at least Southern
California had been a little different. Right. It
was quite different. Were you already married
then? Yes, I was married before the war. Okay. So
then the point is you're already a mature student
then, anxious to... Yes, I was in my late 20s at that
time. Most of us, there were one or two fellows that
had gotten into meteorology right out of college,
but most of us were in our late 20s. And what was your
master's degree problem, if I may ask? At that
time, we had so much coursework to do that they
didn't require a problem. So each one of us got a
master's degree just with coursework. OK. And
then you go on to work towards a PhD? Right. And I did
my PhD in light scattering and turbid waters.
And with whom did you work? I started out under and
he left right about the middle of my graduate
career. And then I finished up with Carl Eckert.
If it's fair to say, what oceanographers had an
impact upon you that helped to direct your career?
Anyone you'd like to name by name? Well, I think Dr.
Spurduck had the greatest effect. Most people
don't realize or haven't heard that Spurduck was
well-known in his own country as a sociologist and
writer on things that had to do with other than
science. He was a very, very fine person. What was
he like? Well, he was kind of down to earth. He came
from a family of preachers and Arctic explorers,
which is, again, quite a combination. And well, he
just knew people, liked people, and was just
inspirational, if I can use that term. And then is
he whom you think helps to direct your early work
towards light scattering? No, I'm not sure just
how I got into light scattering.
I had not started to work on my thesis until after
he'd gone, and I was pretty well into life
scattering before I went to Carl Eckert and asked
him if he would be my thesis director. So I really
did it all on my own. Okay. Well, it seems many
people have commented how close-knit the early
community was at Scripps at this time, and how
they've become unhappier as graduate schools
have become fragmented. But yet your experience
would seem to indicate that you were pretty well
left on your own at Scripps. Is that the wrong
inference to draw? I think Scripps has a tendency
to let people do, to work on their own if they'll do
it. This was my impression at any rate. And you
leave Scripps to go to Johns Hopkins, is that
correct? Right, I left Scripps in 1948 with Don
Pritchard to start the Chesapeake Bay Institute
at Johns Hopkins. And what were to be the goals of
the Chesapeake Bay Institute, which you ended up
directing? No, I never was director. I was
associate director. Associate, okay, I'm sorry.
Or assistant director, I've forgotten which.
Well, Chesapeake Bay is extremely important as a
source of seafood. There were a lot of problems
associated with pollution, freshwater inflow
that affected the... fish and shellfish that were
taken out of the bay, and the idea was that the
states of Maryland and Virginia and the U.S. Navy
would together set up this institute. The Navy's
primary interest, I think, was to have a teaching
organization close by so that people who were
working in oceanography in Washington could get
formal training at Johns Hopkins. How many of you
were first there? How large was the faculty? I
think we started off, I was the first one to come.
Don Pritchard came second as director, and then we
had about three others by the time I left in 1953.
And what did you do and why did you leave? Well, I'd
always wanted to get back to Oregon. And I'd been
writing letters here trying to get something
going and hadn't really had much success. So I made
a trip out and talked to the dean of the School of
Science at Oregon State and said, if I can bring my
own contract and pay my salary, can I come and start
an oceanography set up at Oregon State? He says,
fine. And the Navy was good enough to give me a small
contract to get started in 1954. But 53, 54, you
were at the University of Washington, weren't
you? This is right. I sort of had to get closer to
Oregon State to get the thing started, and this is
why I took a year's job there. Okay, and I take it you
worked there with Fleming then? I worked with
Fleming, and mainly with Dr. Barnes. Okay. He was
the principal physical oceanographer then. And
what sort of work did you do? that year at
Washington? What's our research work? The Navy
had asked me if I would try to
get some of the data that they had been collecting
there over a period of years in a shape so that it
could be used, published in effect. So I spent most
of the time editing data and getting out data
reports of one kind or another. Now, this is, I'm
really breaking away from the chronology, but I
want to do it right here anyway. The I take it most of
the work you do with the Navy is through ONR. Yes,
we've never had any contracts that I know of that
weren't through ONR. Okay. See, ONR started about
30 years ago, just about the time I started out.
Right, now that's exactly what I want to ask you
about. What were your first contacts with ONR? It
begins right at the end of the war. Well, I was in
charge of the bath thermograph section, which
actually was supported by some other section in
the Navy, and then... I think I had my first contact
with ONR when I went back to Johns Hopkins in 1948,
and as I said before, they supported a third of
Chesapeake Bay Institute when it started up.
Okay, and with whom did you work in the ONR office?
Gordon Lill was the first person, and he was there
for a number of years. Okay. So you really then
arrive at ONR after Revell has left, I suppose.
This is right. Okay, now, when Lill tried to fund
research, did it seem very mission-oriented
then, or did it seem pretty open, deep-water
research? Were research grants difficult to get?
Were they giving block research grants? Did you
have pretty well control of your own money? Well,
at that time, we had pretty well had control of our
own money, but we were given block grants, in
effect. They were fairly small. My first grant
here was for $10,000, which took care of my salary
and all the assistance I had and everything. And it
stayed that for about five or six years. So the
grants weren't very big, but they were not
necessarily mission-oriented. As long as it was
good science, that was all I required. Okay. There
seems to have been a change in that lately now, ever
since... Oh, really, the Nixon administration, I
suppose. Well, Mansfield had an amendment to some
bill in which he directed that the research
supported by the Defense Department be more
mission-oriented, and then things changed about
that. Okay. Do you think this was a mistake? I
haven't really thought too much about it. It's
been harder to work under the present rules than
the past rules, but I think that... We really
haven't had any great trouble with ONR. So when you
come to Oregon State, then from Washington, you
come in effect to almost the founder department,
by the way, is what they keep telling me at
Washington. What did you have in mind when you came
here? I'm not a planner. Okay. I just thought that I
could start a program and make it grow, and I spun my
wheels for about five years until 19... 58 or 59 and
then things started to happen and I had done some
planning during this period and the department
was set up in 1959 and then grew very rapidly. Okay.
Between 55 and 59 what did you primarily work on?
Well, I had a 14-foot skiff and a 15-horsepower
outboard and I'd go up and down the coast and work in
the estuaries. I published several papers on the,
on Oregon estuaries And then the Coast Guard had a
40-footer that operated out of Newport, and I
persuaded them to go out on a 25-mile line once a
month, and we'd go out and do a hydrographic
section. This started about 1955, I think. So it
was a pretty minimal operation. Did you have any
students working with you? My first student
was... Well, I had two students in those days. One
was Bruce McAllister, and the other one was...
named Calloway. I think Calloway got his degree
first, a master's degree, and Bruce got his a
little bit later. These were before we had the
department. I was in the Department of General
Science. Okay, well that answers the next
question. I wonder what department you worked out
of. Right. Now then, when you began to plan to
create a department itself, how did you go about
it? Whom did you talk to? Well, the department
actually came in a hurry. Gordon Lill had put
$250,000 in the Navy's 10-year plan called Tenoc.
This would have been about 1958. This $250,000 was
to build a boat or a ship for Oregon State, but
nothing came of it for a year or so. I was down in San
Diego chairmening a meeting of the western
section of the American Society of Limnology and
Oceanography, and I got a telephone call. and this
was on a Thursday, I think, and Lil said, this was in
June, I have $250,000. If you can have a proposal in
here by Monday, I'll give it to you to build your
boat. I didn't even go back to the meeting. I just
went to the airport and took off. And as soon as I
knew I was going to get the $250,000, I went and
talked to the president and said, look, I think
this is a real propitious time. If you could set up a
department out of whole cloths, so to speak, I
think that we could really make this go, because
the Navy isn't going to give me $250,000 without
giving me money to run the boat, and this will
require other researchers to keep it busy. And the
president said, fine. So I think it was the only
time a department was set up with one person that
I've ever heard of. OK. Now, you were chairman of
the department from 59 to 67, right? Right. During
this period of time also, you talk about Marine
Science Center in Newport, Oregon. Right. Now,
what is that? We needed a place to dock our vessels.
These are vessels that were going to come in the
future. We had the Akona at that time. This is the
one we built with the 250,000. And
I got to talking to several people in Newport about
the possibility of setting up a lab there. And one
or two fellows said, well, fine. The port has got
some nice land on the other side of the river. We can
get a lease for you. So we began talking. And pretty
soon, they gave us a lease for 49 acres. And I put a
proposal into NSF to build a building. And while
this was still pending, they had several site
visits on it. And I thought I had a fairly good
chance of putting up a small building. The Area
Redevelopment Administration came to my
attention. Newport was a very depressed area, and
they were trying to figure out some way to get some
more jobs in the community. So I came up with the
idea of building a Marine Science Center and said
that, well, I can get 60 or 70 jobs, and this might be
a good thing to do. And it took some politicking,
but eventually most of the people in town got
behind it, and we put in a proposal for $900,000.
90,000, sort of a JCPenney amount, just below a
million dollars, and it went right through.
Excellent. With whom did you work in the area of
redevelopment? I've forgotten the name of the
fellow. He was in Portland. The main reason it went
through was that I knew a lot of people in
Washington that were interested in what I was
doing, backing me to some extent. In particular,
John Lyman was one of the best ones. So I got each one
of these people to make a pitch to the area
redevelopment in Washington. And I think somehow
they were convinced, and they went along with it.
It's interesting that practically everybody
else in the country then tried to get some funds,
and the door was closed, and nobody else got them.
Nobody else got them built. Maybe they didn't have
John Lyman to make the pitch. John Lyman did a good
job. So then you're, in effect, wearing two hats in
this period. One is that you're chairman of the
department. The other is you're trying to found in
this marine research center. Right. While
chairman of the department, how did you try to
direct the department? What kind of people did you
try to bring into it? How did you see Oregon State's
future in oceanography, if I may use those words?
Well, at the start, it was rather difficult
because we didn't have anything. We were 100%
almost, yeah, we were 100% on grants. And it was
difficult to get the first one or two people, and
they had to be sort of adventuresome and people
that would come. And Dr. Herbert Ferlander was the
first one. I think the reason he came was he was
passed over. Promotion was a little bit peeved at
the University of Washington, and so he came. I
think I was just plain lucky in getting good
people. I didn't really have any criteria other
than people that I thought would get along with
each other and work as a team. And then you expected
these people to bring in enough grant money to
support themselves. This is the way we had to start
out, yes. And soon after we had the department set
up, then we got one or two positions from the
university. And this grew until now. I think we
have about 11 positions paid by the university out
of 60 PhDs. So it's still only a small percentage.
It seemed to me when I checked, you're about 10%
state funded. I don't think we've ever been as high
as ten percent. More like six or seven. So almost
immediately then Oregon State has to support
itself and bring people in from grants. What sort
of proposals did you offer? Did it seem to be some
sort of a unique advantage you had here at Oregon
State? Work off the Oregon coast, for example? The
research business is like any other business.
It's like a factory. If you can get something
coming out the other end and sell it, then you can
grow. So that our whole pitch was to get results as
quickly as we could and do good research and keep it
going. And it's very highly competitive.
If you produce, you get paid. If you don't produce,
you fall apart. And so that was then the basis, that
was the pressure you worked under? Yeah. What
about in terms of undergraduate instruction? Did
you try to expand into a general degree in
oceanography? No, I've always felt that a person
needed to be a good, to have a good training in one of
the basic sciences before they could go on and
apply this to the oceans.
While we've taught a lot of undergraduate
students, we've never had a degree. We presently
teach something like 600 different students take
undergraduate classes. Now then, you subscribe
to the concept that someone should take a degree in
the hard sciences and then go on to a degree in
oceanography. They want an advanced degree in
oceanography. What sort of hard science degrees
do you prefer for them to take? Well, we have five
different divisions, and in each one they have a
different selection. In physical oceanography,
it's either math or physics or a combination of
these two. In geology, geological oceanography,
it's geology. Biological oceanography,
biology. Chemical oceanography, chemistry, and
so on. There seems to be a goodly number of
complaints I've heard recently, though, about
the failure of mathematical training of the
people who are coming into oceanography. They say
it feels as if... the undergraduate students
should take more mathematics. Would you agree
with that? Well, I'm sure that there are problems
with mathematical training. However, it seems as
though we have a good enough selection of students
that we really haven't had much trouble with. Most
of them have their math. Very good. There also
seems to be some complaint among your colleagues
that the world of the general oceanographer seems
to be collapsing. that if someone like yourself
who came from urology into physical oceanography
into other research, that these people are not
developed anymore because the field is too
specialized. I have a feeling of sadness because
this is true. Last week I went to a meeting at
Scripps in which there were about 50
theoreticians and four or five people that did
field work, and I felt a terrible imbalance there.
Now, it... That's also another complaint, is
oceanographers no longer get their feet wet, that
the computers have eliminated people going out on
ships as much as they should. Would you agree with
that? Yes, I agree with that. I believe if you're an
oceanographer, you ought to go to sea. In the
field, you ought to go to sea. Or take the models
you're building and test them out in the field
itself? Well, if possible. I realize that a person
can't be everything, but I think that some of the
theoreticians are too far removed from the
applied science. From the sea life, all right. For
example, I try to go to sea at least a month every
year and average that, and have for years. That's
good. Then you leave the chairmanship of the
department, what, in 67, is that correct? 66 or 67.
All right, and then you become associate dean of
oceanography. I became associate dean of
research. Research, I'm sorry. Yeah, for the
university, with oceanography as my specialty.
If you can turn that off for a minute, I'll tell you
why. OK.
Looking back over this first part of your career,
as you've sketched it in effect roughly, Scripps,
then out to Chesapeake Bay, then as chairman of the
department, and then as a dean for research, would
you change anything? Oh, goodness. I'm sure that
if a person thought about it, he might try to change
something, but I don't look back very often.
I think that I've been extremely fortunate. I've
had a lot of good luck. In what way? Well, breaks.
There are three ingredients. You try to select
good people, you work your tail off, and you have
good luck. I think you make your own luck part of
that. Okay. Now, in this period, as you're sort of
going upward, are there any of your colleagues you
would like to mention as people who had sizable
effects upon you as you shaped your career along
the way?
Well, I think the early staff that we had helped a
good deal. We started out with Dr. Frolander and
Dr. Byrne, Dr. Petullo. Each one of these people
were very fine people, hardworking, liked
people, were good with students. And I think that I
was just extremely fortunate to have that team to
start off with, because I didn't have to worry
about any of them. They did their work. They
helped. And the next layer were Bill Piercy, Larry
Small, Vern Combe. They were all exactly the same
way. I didn't have any troublemakers or anybody
trying to pull a place apart, and I think that was
pretty good. Now, I just have two or three more
questions about administration, and then I want
to go back to your academic career. It's almost as
if ONR deliberately tried to establish
departments of oceanography in the 50s and 60s,
beginning about 57 with IGY. Are there too many
departments of oceanography now? Well, there are
about roughly 15 first-line departments, and I
think that's enough. I don't mean to be selfish,
but it takes a certain critical mass to run an
oceanographic organization. You have to have a
ship that costs you a million dollars a year to
operate, and I believe that perhaps 15 for the
country is enough. And the lid was sort of placed
on... further growth by NSF some years ago by not
supporting new outfits with facilities that they
needed. Several states have had powerful enough
support from within the state to break this form,
or whatever you want to call it, and there have been
several states that have started up programs
since the lid was sort of placed on it, but not very
many. Delaware, for example, and North Carolina
were too.
In accumulating this funding for your
university, were you happy to see the division
between ONR and NSF? Did that seem to you to be
essentially a good thing? I think it's an
extremely good thing. I think you need sort of
checks and balances. If we only had one
organization to go to, out of 25 or 50
administrators that would have something to do
with that organization, there'd be a few that
weren't really very good. And you might run into a
situation where you just couldn't move if you just
had one person that you were dealing with. This way
you can work with both, and I think this is very
healthy. All right, so I take it then that you would
be opposed, to answer your question earlier, you
would be opposed towards the move, which seems to
be developing, about a super organization. I'm
dead set against it. I always have been. Okay, so
you think that, in this case, diversity of
organizations is better. Well, I think so as far as
support of contract and grant research. For
example, we've had NOAA for a number of years. And
NOAA has been advised time and again by various
advisory groups and people that they'd ought to
have better rapport with the universities.
They'd ought to do some granting within
universities. And aside from Sea Grant, which was
given to them as a whole package, they really
haven't done anything. And I'm afraid if we had a
super organization that the money would be
channeled into the organization and the funds
outside would tend to dry up. That would be, you're
talking about primarily in-house research.
Right, right. What's wrong with in-house
research? Guys in NOAA say it's very efficient.
There are all kinds of opinions on this. I happen to
believe that it's much cheaper and more efficient
to do it in universities. By contract. Some of your
colleagues maintain that the problem with
in-house research is you get in-house proposal
reviews. This is correct, to some degree. And they
dislike that idea. We have to be on our toes. Every
single grant or every single proposal we put in
gets a thorough working over, and we have to
satisfy our peers. or we can't be funded. I don't
think this is true to this extent in your house.
Also, it has been suggested that one of the
problems with the new grant-giving techniques is
you almost have to come with a specialized grant.
You expect them to look it over the grant, and then
the grant's very limited, and that limits freedom
of research. Now, that's a very poorly put
question, but there was a time when you had a
blanket amount of money to run a show. you could say
i want to go out for two or three days and try this out
and then if it worked then you could take that data
and make a solid proposal if it didn't well you just
took that two or three day loss well i think there's
a tendency in the direction that you're pointing
however i have found that if i'm perfectly honest
with onr and want to try something a little bit
different than i put in my proposal i they've never
objected They've been extremely good and free to
allow me to make minor changes and to do some
exploratory work. And this is just really the last
question about that, but I take it you've been
quite happy in terms of contract work with the
government. You feel like you've had what we call
loosely academic freedom and all this kind of
thing. I don't have anything to complain about at
all. Individually, occasionally, I'll put a
proposal in, and I'll get some bad reviews and
won't get it, and this makes me a little bit angry,
but I think the system is about as good as you can
develop it.